---
title : "Secure Insight: GigaOm Partners with the CISO Series"
layout: post
tags: tutorial labnol
post_inspiration: https://gigaom.com/2021/04/09/secure-insight/
image: "https://sergio.afanou.com/assets/images/image-midres-18.jpg"
---

<p>Don’t look now, but GigaOm, the analyst firm that enables smart businesses to future-proof their decisions, is forging new partnerships to extend its reach and better inform busy IT decision makers. On Thursday, the company announced it was teaming with the <a href="http://www.cisoseries.com" target="_blank" rel="noopener">CISO Series</a> to share content and better support the community of chief information security officers, security practitioners, and security vendors.</p>
<p>“The CISO Series is one we have admired for a while because they have a very similar aim: They help security professionals become more knowledgeable and understand how their roles are changing,” said Ben Book, GigaOm founder and CEO. “We saw a clear common interest and are delighted to be working together.”</p>
<p>The CISO Series brand has built a formidable reputation through its podcasts, blogs, video chats, and live events for the security community. It has added the extremely popular CyberSecurity Headlines podcast to its stable this year, which joins the CISO/Security Vendor Relationship and Defense in Depth podcasts. Every Friday at 10am Pacific Time, the CISO Series hosts its highly engaging and fun weekly live CISO Series Video Chat, which <a href="http://crowdcast.io/cisoseries" target="_blank" rel="noopener">viewers can register for here</a>.</p>
<p>The channel partnership connects two of the strongest, fastest-growing brands in enterprise IT content production. The agreement enables the CISO Series to share exclusive GigaOm reports with its audience ahead of publication, while GigaOm is able to share insights from the CISO Series’ various publications through its social channels and newsletters. The CISO Series joins other media firms, such as The Register and SDXCentral, as official GigaOm Channel Partners.</p>
<p>“We are delighted to be working with GigaOm because we’re not only both addressing the same audience, but we’re also both trying to bring education and understanding to both the security vendor and practitioner communities,” said David Spark, managing editor and executive producer at the CISO Series. “GigaOm is providing some excellent reports that we’re leaning on for our discussions and reporting across all of our shows.”</p>
<p>Spark continued: “We are always tweaking our programming to bring the best and most up-to-date resources and we’re really impressed with both the volume and quality GigaOm is delivering. Not only are we impressed with their editorial work, but we also appreciate their business branding. It’s something we felt comfortable about aligning with the CISO Series brand as well.”</p>
<p>Check out the CISO Series schedule at <a href="http://crowdcast.io/cisoseries" target="_blank" rel="noopener">http://crowdcast.io/cisoseries</a>, or visit <a href="http://cisoseries.com" target="_blank" rel="noopener">cisoseries.com</a> for more information about the CISO Series and its weekly Video Chats.</p>
